{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cambria-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Cambria;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
{\info
{\author Kenneth A. Grady}}\vieww12540\viewh16140\viewkind1\viewscale208
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Are Lawyers and Doctors Really Different? 
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 If you have been around project management, process improvement and law, you will have heard how \'93law is different.\'94 Although efficiency philosophies have been applied to most industries, lawyers argue law is different so efficiency philosophies won\'92t really work. Fortunately for clients, each day more lawyers have realized that law and efficiency are not mutually incompatible.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Doctors also Think They are Different
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf0 This past week, I had the opportunity to help teach a class on service industry operations at the University of Toronto Rotman Management School. About 40 MBA students participated in the class. They all work full-time and are getting their MBAs through the Executive MBA program. The class was amazing \'96 the students were deeply engaged and their questions challenging. \
As you might expect, none of them were lawyers and none of them worked in the legal industry. Their day jobs covered many areas, including healthcare. As we talked, it became clear that healthcare and law faced many of the same challenges. On the funding side, money is tight and the healthcare industry is being asked to do more with less. On the supplier side, doctors often had the same reaction to efficiency initiatives as lawyers, \'93healthcare is different.\'94 The doctors see themselves as providing bespoke healthcare where each patient/illness combination is different.\

\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Creativity versus Execution\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 \

\f2 Underlying the bespoke concept is the thought that lawyers and doctors bring creativity to what they do. Lawyers devise creative solutions to legal issues, and doctors devise creative treatments for medical issues. Those creative solutions, say lawyers and doctors can\'92t be packaged, systematized and process mapped. Creative solutions do come up in solving legal and medical issues, though not as often as lawyers and doctors would like to think. But putting that aside, the lawyer and doctor argument does not negate using efficiency philosophies in the practice of law or medicine.
\f1 \
\

\f2 To understand why, we must separate what lawyers and doctors do into two broad categories. In the first category, they think about what to do. Should the acquisition be a stock deal or an asset deal? Should the client mediate, arbitrate, or litigate? Should the treatment involve radiation therapy or chemotherapy? Is the best treatment course medications or surgery? These are all substantive issues where lawyers and doctors apply their creative skills. \
\
In the second category, we talk about executing the solution. If it is a stock acquisition, then the lawyers must efficiently do document preparation and due diligence. If the choice is surgery, then the doctors must do the surgery efficiently. There may come moments in implementing each process when substantive (creative) decisions must be made, but for the most part the execution phase involves doing efficiently not creating.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Painters, Sculptors and Efficiency\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 \

\f2 Let\'92s think about this in some areas most of us would call creative. The sculptor must create the idea for the sculpture. But, having created that concept, sculpting itself involves a lot of process, with smaller creative decisions along the way. The sculptor doesn\'92t create a new process for bronze casting or welding. She employs processes efficiently to execute on her creative vision. A painter must create what to paint, but executing on that concept requires discipline and process. The painter must properly prepare the canvas, know how to mix the paint, and have control over how the paint is applied. Simply putting the right colors on the canvas in the right place is not enough. 
\f1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 So, No, Lawyers and Doctors aren\'92t Different\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 \

\f2 Good lawyers will tear into these examples, pointing out where the analogies break down. But again, that isn\'92t the point. What we think of as creative pursuits, whether sculpting, painting, practicing law or medicine, actually are composed of creative and execution elements. It is fine to be creative, but that should not extend to being creative each time we execute a process. Creativity in execution is what we seek to avoid.
\f1 \
\

\f2 Lawyers and doctors are not really different from anyone else when it comes to efficiency philosophies. Trying to maintain that they are actually detracts from their credibility. Rather than arguing we are different, it is better for us to accept that efficiency is an important aspect of what we do. By becoming more efficient, we reduce the time we spend on things that don\'92t add value to our days or to our clients and patients. We can then use that time to focus on developing creative solutions that help our clients mitigate legal or medical issues they might face in the future.
\f1 \
\
\
}